I'm looking for how much food someone in the middle ages should eat in a day.

Facts:
1 gram of fat ~= 9 calories
1 gram of carb/protein ~= 4 calories

Meats are typically about 20% fat: 1 gram of meat = 3.2 + 1.8 = 5 calories
Vegetables and everything else is about 0% fat: 4 calories / gram

I can run with about 4.2 calories per gram, and then calculate how many
calories a person eats and what effect that has on them.


Resting Energy Expenditure:
Easy formula: Males = 11 x body weight in pounds; females = 10 x body weight
in pounds

Hard formula:
Males: 66.47 + 13.75 * weight in kg + 5 * height in cm - 6.76 * age in years
Females: 655.1 + 9.65 * weight in kg + 1.84 * height in cm - 4.68 * age in
years.

The hard formula requires that I have heights and weights of the individuals.
This isn't too hard --- it's what computers are good at. I'd need a
distribution of heights and weights at given ages, birth to 99. I can set a
genetic predisposition towards a certain height or weight that will move the
individual one way or the other on the scale. I could calculate for growing
children how many calories they need to build their height (assuming kids are
spheres --- hey, I'm a physicist!) and then how many calories they need to get
healthy weight gain, and then how many they need to maintain their activity.
Not enough calories means they have stunted growth. Add it up over long terms,
and you have midget, skinny children and adults.

I could go the anal retentive way. Each food has a calorie chart. The amount
of each food is tracked separately. Then people consume their food. The excess
calories end up contributing to growth or limits the health and ability of the
individual, and increases their disposition to sickness. I could take it six
steps further and track all of the known microingredients -- vitamins and
minerals -- and calculate what the healthy levels are, what deficiencies in
one area or another is thought to lead to, etc...

I don't think such a project is insurmountable. It would be entirely data
driven, of course, and would be quite fun to work with.


SIMPLEST MODEL
==============

The average American eats about 4.7 pounds of food a day. In the Middle Ages,
I assume that eating 1 lb of food a day is enough to survive, barely. 2 pounds
is more ideal, and livable, though a person could go all the way up to 5
pounds of food a day, after which they would get quite fat.


HOW MUCH FOOD TO EAT? How much to store?
=====================

In the winter months, the people might calculate how much food they have
stored versus how much longer until they can get food from the land again. In
addition to this, they likely set aside some animals to be slaughtered at key
times. This food planning was done carefully, and generally allowed for some
bad things to happen.

In the summer months, the goal was to reach the storage goal to survive
winter. As long as you think you can hit that goal of stored food, eat as much
as you can! You need the energy to do all the work needed. How can you predict
how much food you will get from your activities? You know how large your field
is, what the typical yield is.

In the game, it is up to the player to budget the food. They need to set
storage goals and eating goals. However, households outside of the player's
control need to set their own goals. These goals will reflect the attributes
and traits of the head of household.

Extra food can be given to the church to donate to the poor and needy, as a
sort of community storehouse. Strong households might also give away some of
their food each day, particularly in the winter months.

Some households which focus on producing foods will sell their surplus foods
at the market. They will pace themselves to ensure they always have something
to sell. They depend on a steady flow of coin from those who do not store
their food effectively.

Households with regular income and a functioning market nearby may count on
the market having food available during the winter. This is risky, but can be
advantageous.

ROTTING FOOD
============

Medievil man was mostly worried about preserving food for winter. That means
3-6 months of cold before you can start subsisting on the land again.

The principal preservative method was drying or salting the food. In winter
times, livestock would supplement the dried foods from the summer. Grains also
store well, and can lead to bread all year long.

Storing food came with its own problems.

- Thieves would steal stored food. Those thieves may be found in your own
  house!

- Food rots over time unless properly preserved.

- Vermin like mice and such may eat your food right out from under you. This
  is particularly true for grain.

One of the best places to store food is in your belly. It wasn't uncommon for
people to fatten up like their cattle, to face the lean months of winter.
